---
navhome: /docs
sort: 1
next: true
title: Setup and nouns
---

# Urbyte 0: setup and nouns

This is the first post in our new Urbyte series.

The Urbyte concept is that you, an ordinary programmer, not a
kernel hacker or a Haskell magician (not that there's anything
wrong with kernel hackers or Haskell magicians) can learn Hoon,
Urbit's programming language.

We're going to test this daring idea by teaching you Hoon, in
easily digestible, byte-size chunks.  Each post in the "Urbytes"
series is designed to take about 15 minutes to consume.  (Maybe
10, if you're a kernel hacker or a Haskell magician.)

We'll assume no knowledge of Urbit except for previous lessons.
Ideally you have some basic familiarity with programming and can
operate the Unix command line.

We strongly encourage you to type in all the examples in each
Urbyte.  Urbytes are short, but not meant to be skimmed.

## Install

First, [install Urbit](http://urbit.org/docs/using/install/) on any
Mac or Unix machine.  On Windows, make a virtual Linux machine
using VirtualBox or a similar tool.

While you're downloading, read about Urbit ships:

## Ships

In the Urbyte exercises, and in your entire Urbit experience,
you'll be running what we call a *ship*.

On Urbit, a *ship* is a single number which means four things:
a network address, a cryptographic identity, a memorable name,
and a virtual computer.

We write this number in a base-256 format, but where each digit
is instead a syllable. So when strung out, your number becomes
a kind of name, like if your phone number was a pronounceable
string that sounded like a name in an alien language. We designate
ships by tagging on `~` to the front of this string. Thus, your
future ship might be something like `~palfun-foslup`, which on
Urbit is literally just the number 1,245,952.

For this exercise series, you'll be running a specific kind of
ship called a *comet*. Unlike other ships, comets are disposable
identities, making them ideal for playing around with Hoon (in
case you break something!) and showing off Urbit to your friends.

In the future, if you wish to contribute to Urbit itself, an even
more ideal sandbox for Urbit development is what we call a *fake
`~zod`* (~zod is ship 0 on the Urbit network, and is a very
important ship indeed!). More information on that can be found
[here](http://urbit.org/fora/posts/~2017.1.5..21.31.04..20f3~/).

You can also read more about the Urbit address space and Urbit's
different classes of ships [here](https://urbit.org/posts/address-space/).

Please keep in mind that Urbit is still alpha software and bugs
will be found. If you think you've find one somewhere along this
series, please don't hesitate to file an issue on Github, or even
better, [find us on Talk](https://urbit.org/stream)! But our team
and our contributors are working hard to make Urbit real. More on
our mission [here](http://urbit.org/posts/overview/).

Without further ado, let's learn Hoon!


## Create and restart

Assuming you've installed Urbit as per above, to create your
comet, run:

```
$ urbit -c mycomet
```

This will take a few minutes and will spin out a bunch of boot
messages (you are booting an operating system, after all!).

At the end, you'll see something like:

```
ames: on localhost, UDP 58730.
http: live (insecure, public) on 8080
http: live ("secure", public) on 8443
http: live (insecure, loopback) on 12321
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
```

where `~palnul_nocser` is actually a shortened version of our
full comet identity (comets are 128-bits, or 16 syllables!).
Think of the `_` here as an ellipsis.

But wait, we want to see our actual name! There's actually a
simple command for that, which will also help us make sure that
everything is working. We can type this command into our *Dojo*.

On Urbit, the Dojo acts as both our Hoon REPL and our Arvo shell.

Type `our` at the Dojo prompt, then hit Return.

Your Dojo should have printed your full comet name, something
like this:

```
ames: on localhost, UDP 58730.
http: live (insecure, public) on 8080
http: live ("secure", public) on 8443
http: live (insecure, loopback) on 12321
> our
~palnul-wolmev-bonfex-danred--tilwen-midlux-bolfus-nocser
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
```

That's a mouthful! We'll add a note towards the end on how you can
ask for a "planet", a shorter identity like `~tonret-sigsur`, that
you can keep forever.

Let's add some numbers!

````
ames: on localhost, UDP 58730.
http: live (insecure, public) on 8080
http: live ("secure", public) on 8443
http: live (insecure, loopback) on 12321
> our
~palnul-wolmev-bonfex-danred--tilwen-midlux-bolfus-nocser
> (add 2 2)
4
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
````

And because you're running Martian software now:

````
ames: on localhost, UDP 58730.
http: live (insecure, public) on 8080
http: live ("secure", public) on 8443
http: live (insecure, loopback) on 12321
> our
~palnul-wolmev-bonfex-danred--tilwen-midlux-bolfus-nocser
> (add 2 2)
4
> 'Hello Mars!'
'Hello Mars!'
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
````


Congratulations!  You made your first nouns!

We'll make a few more in a second.  First, quit Urbit
with `ctrl-d`:

```
> our
~palnul-wolmev-bonfex-danred--tilwen-midlux-bolfus-nocser
> (add 2 2)
4
> 'Hello Mars!'
'Hello Mars!'
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
$
```

You now have an Urbit image, or *pier*, in the `mycomet` directory.
Right now the only thing in your pier is Urbit's system files:

```
$ ls -a /path/to/mycomet
./  ../ .urb/
```

Restarting uses almost the same command, but without `-c` (which
means "create").  There are also fewer startup messages:

```
$ urbit mycomet
[...]
ames: on localhost, UDP 58730.
http: live (insecure, public) on 8080
http: live ("secure", public) on 8443
http: live (insecure, loopback) on 12321
~palnul_nocser:dojo>
```

Not too scary, right?

Note also that Urbit is an ACID database.  You can stop it
politely with `ctrl-d`, abruptly with `ctrl-z`, even violently with `kill
-9`.  None of these should cause Urbit to lose data.  If you do
manage to corrupt a pier, it's a bug;
please let us know.

## Let's make a noun

You've already made three nouns.  Let's make another!

*(We won't show the `~palnul_nocser:dojo> ` prompt from here on out.
We'll just show the echoed command.*


*So*

```
~palnul_nocser:dojo> 42
```

*now becomes:*

```
> 42
42
~zod:dojo>
```

*Awesome.)*

## Understanding nouns

A value in Urbit is called a *noun*.  A noun is either an *atom*
(an unsigned integer of any size) or a *cell* (an ordered pair of
any two nouns).

In a sentence, a noun is a binary tree whose leaves are numbers.
If you know Lisp, a noun is a minimalist S-expression.  A noun
can't have cycles (pointer loops).  An implementation can use
dags (shared subtrees), but the programmer can't detect them
(there's no pointer equality test).

The absence of graph cycles makes nouns much easier to save in
persistent storage, send over the network, manage memory for
(Urbit has no tracing garbage collector), etc.

## Let's make some atoms

So one kind of atom is a number.  And the syntax (or at least one
syntax) for a number is a decimal, like `42`.  Seems legit.

But just to be sure we understand this decimal thing, let's make
some atoms:

```
> 4
4
```

Seems pretty straightforward.

```
> 42
42
```

Why not try it again to make sure?

```
> 420
420
```

Can we add another zero?

```
> 420
```

Wat?  When you tried to type that next zero and turn `420` into
`4200`, Urbit actually *deleted the `0` and beeped at you.*

But isn't an atom an unsigned integer of any size?  It is.
But the syntax is actually `4.200`:

```
> 4.200
4.200
> (mul 42 100)
4.200
```


Just think of it as "4,200", written the German way with a dot.

Why?  Long decimals are unreadable.  Human beings know this, so
we group them in threes.  For some historical reason, programming
languages never copied this marvelous usability innovation.

English notation for decimals is more common than German
notation.  Unfortunately, dot is URL-safe and comma isn't, and
it's nice to have a regular syntax for atoms that's URL-safe.

As for why Urbit deleted your zero: it parses your command line
as you type, and rejects any characters after the parser stops.

## Let's make some cells

There's not much mystery about cells.  A cell has a head and a
tail, and puts brackets around them:

```
> [42 420]
[42 420]
```

`42` is the *head* and `420` is the *tail* of the cell.  Cell
syntax nests to the right:

```
> [4 [42 420]]
[4 42 420]

> [4 42 420]
[4 42 420]

> [[4 42] 420]
[[4 42] 420]
```

If you look at these nouns as binary trees, you see

```
 [4 [42 420]]       [[4 42] 420]
     .                  .
    / \                /  \
   4   .              .   420
      / \            / \
    42  420         4  42
```

Each number is an atom; each dot is a cell.

## And we're done

And we're done!  Type `|exit` to exit:

```
~palnul_nocser:dojo> |exit
%drum-exit
$
```

## Questions and/or exercises

And we're done with our very first Urbyte!  Here's a question to
think about.  These exercises are never mandatory, but they may
be fun and/or interesting.  Skip them if they're obvious.

The question today is: what is the right way to represent common
data structures as nouns?  A linked list?  A string?  A *signed*
integer?  A table or associative array?  Just try to picture
these structures in your head, or draw them on a piece of paper.

## Ask for a planet

If you think Urbit is cool and want to jump on for the ride,
first **subscribe to our mailing list**
[on our homepage](http://urbit.org/) and
[join us](http://urbit.org/docs/using/messaging/)
in our `/urbit-meta` chatroom to talk and hang out!
[We're also on Twitter](https://twitter.com/urbit_). Once on
`/urbit-meta`, our devs will try and hook you up with a planet.

##### Thanks for joining!
