---
navhome: /docs/
next: false
sort: 13
title: Network messages
---

Network messages
================

Now we've learned enough Hoon to do more interesting things. Let's get
our planets to talk to each other.

All we've written up until now are just shell commands that produce a
value and then disappear. To listen for and receive messages from other
planets, we'll need an app. Let's look at a very simple one:

    ::  Accepts any noun from dojo and prints it out
    ::
    ::::  /hoon/echo/examples/app
      ::
    /?    314
    !:
    |_  {bowl state/$~}
    ++  poke-noun
      |=  arg/*
      ^-  {(list) _+>.$}
      ~&  [%argument arg]
      [~ +>.$]
    --

This is a very simple app that does only one thing. If you poke it with
a value, it prints that value out. To try this out, you have to start
the app, then you can poke it from the command line with the following
commands:

    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> |start %examples-echo
    'prep'
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-echo 5
    [%argument 5]
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-echo [1 2]
    [%argument [1 2]]
    >=

> There is currently a bug where the `%argument` lines are printed
> *above* the line you entered, so your output may not look exactly like
> this. `>=` means that a command was successfully received and
> executed.

Most of the app code should be simple enough to guess its function. The
important part of this code is the definition of `++poke-noun`.

Once an app starts, it's always running in the background and you
interact with it by sending it messages. The most straightforward way to
do that is to poke it from the command line, which we we did with
`:echo 5` (`:[app-name] [argument(s)]`).

In this case, `++poke-noun` takes an argument `arg` and prints it out
with `~&` ([sigpam](../../hoon/twig/sig-hint/pam-dump/)). This is an unusual
rune that formally "does nothing", but the interpreter detects it and
printfs the first child, before executing the second as if the first
didn't exist. This is a slightly hacky way of printing to the console,
but we'll get to the correct way later on.

But what does `++poke-noun` produce? Recall that `^-` casts to a type.
In this case, it's declaring that the end result of the function will be of
type `{(list) _+>.$}`. But what does this mean?

The phrase to remember is "a list of moves and our state". Urbit is a
message passing system, so whenever we want to do something that
interacts with the rest of the system, we send a message. Thus, a move
is Arvo's equivalent of a syscall. The first thing that `++poke-noun`
produces is a list of messages, called "moves". In this case, we don't
actually want the system to do anything, so we produce the empty list,
`~` (in the `[~ +>.$]` line).

The second thing `++poke-noun` produces is our state. `+>.$` refers to a
particular address in our subject where our formal app state is stored.
It'll become clear why this is later on, but for now pretend that `+>.$`
is a magic invocation that means "app state".

Let's look at another example (edit your code in
`/app/examples/echo/hoon` to reflect the code below). Say we want to
only accept a number, and then print out the square of that number.

    /?    314
    !:
    |_  {bowl state/$~}
    ::
    ++  poke-atom
      |=  arg/@
      ^-  {(list) _+>.$}
      ~&  [%square (mul arg arg)]
      [~ +>.$]
    --

A few things have changed. Firstly, we no longer accept arbitrary nouns
because we can only square atoms (integers, in this case an unsigned
one). Thus, our argument is now `arg/@`. Secondly, it's `++poke-atom`
rather than `++poke-noun`.

Intro to marks
==============

Are there other `++poke`s? Yes. In fact, `noun` and `atom` are just two
of arbitrarily many "marks". A mark is fundamentally a type definition,
but accessible at the Arvo level. Each mark is defined in the `/mar`
directory. Some marks have conversion routines to other marks, and some
have diff, patch, and merge algorithms. None of these are required for a
mark to exist, however.

`noun` and `atom` are two predefined marks. In your `/mar` directory,
there are already many more, and you may add more at will. The type
associated with `noun` is `*`, and the type associated with `atom` is
`@`.

When we poke an app from anywhere, we do so with a mark that searches
for the corresponding (`++poke-[mark]`) arm. Data constructed on the
command line is by default marked with `noun`. In this case, the app is
expecting an atom, so we have to explicitly mark the data with `atom`
using `&[mark]`. Try the following commands:

    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> |start %square
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-square 6
    gall: %square: no poke arm for noun
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-square &atom 6
    [%square 36]
    >=

> Recall the bug where `%square` may get printed above the input line.

Marks are powerful, and they're the backbone of Urbit's data pipeline,
so we'll be getting quite used to them.

**Exercise**:

-   Write an app that computes fizzbuzz on its input (as in the previous
    section).

Sending a message to another urbit
==================================

Let's write our first network message! Here's `/app/examples/pong.hoon`:

    /?    314
    |%
      ++  move  {bone term wire *}
    --
    !:
    |_  {bowl state/$~}
    ::
    ++  poke-urbit
      |=  to/@p
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      [[[ost %poke /sending [to dap] %atom 'howdy'] ~] +>.$]
    ::
    ++  poke-atom
      |=  arg/@
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      ~&  [%receiving (@t arg)]
      [~ +>.$]
    ::
    ++  coup  |=(* [~ +>.$])
    --

Run it with these commands:

    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> |start %examples-pong
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-pong &urbit ~sampel-sipnym
    >=

Replace `~sampel-sipnym` with another urbit. The easiest thing to do is
to start a moon, a sub-identity of your urbit. If you don't know how to
start a moon, see [the user admin section](/docs/using/admin/). Don't
forget to start the `%examples-pong` app on that urbit, too. You should
see, on the foreign urbit, this output:

    [%receiving 'howdy']

Most of the code should be straightforward. In `++poke-atom`, the only
new thing is the expression `(@t arg)`, which is the type `@t` being
called as a function with argument `arg`. As we already know, `@t` is
the type of "cord" text strings. In Hoon, when types are called as
functions, they serve as a validator function called a "clam" -- that
is, a function whose domain is all nouns, and range is the given type
(in this case, `@t`).

In simpler terms, if a clam is passed a value of its own type, it
produces that value. Otherwise, it produces the default value (aka the
"bunt") of its type. Here we call this `@t` function on the argument.
This coerces the argument to text, so that we can print it out prettily
no matter what we're passed.

The more interesting part is in `++poke-urbit`. The `urbit` mark is an
urbit identity, and the Hoon type associated with it is `@p` (the "p"
stands for "phonetic base").

Recall that in a `++poke` arm we produce "a list of moves and our
state". Until now, we've left the list of moves empty, since we haven't
wanted to tell Arvo to do anything in particular. Now we want to send a
message to another urbit. Thus, we produce a list with one element:

    [ost %poke /sending [to-urbit-address %pong] %atom 'howdy']

### Moves

The general form of a move is `[bone term wire *]`.

Or, in pseudo-code:

`["cause" sys-call/action tack-new-layer-on-cause action-specific information]`

Let's walk through each of these elements step by step.

#### Bones ("cause")

If you look up `++bone` in `hoon.hoon`, you'll see that it's a number
(`@ud`), and that it's an opaque reference to a duct. `++duct` in
hoon.hoon is a list of `wire`s, where `++wire` is an alias for `++path`.
`++path` is a list of `++knot`s, which are ASCII text. Thus, a duct is a
list of paths, and a bone is an opaque reference to it (in the same way
that a Unix file descriptor is an opaque reference to a file structure).
Thus, to truly understand bones, we must understand ducts.

A duct is stack of causes, again, represented as paths, which are called
wires. At the bottom of every duct is a unix event, such as a keystroke,
network packet, file change, or timer event. When Arvo is given this
event, it routes the event to appropriate kernel module for handling.

Sometimes, the module can immediately handle the event and produce any
necessary results. For example, when we poked the `++poke-atom` arm
above, we poked %gall, our application server, which was able to respond
to our poke directly. When the module cannot service the request itself,
it sends instructions to another kernel module or application (through the
%gall module) to do a specified action, and produces the result from
that.

Furthermore, when one module sends a message to another kernel module or
application, it also sends along the duct it was given with its new wire
tacked onto the end. Now the duct has two entries, with the unix event on
the bottom and the kernel module that handled it next. This process can
continue indefinitely, adding more and more layers onto the duct. When
an entity finally produces a result, a layer is popped off the duct, and
the result is passed all the way back down.

In effect, a duct is an Arvo-level call stack. It's worth noting that
while in traditional call stacks a function call happens synchronously
and returns exactly once. In Arvo, multiple moves can be sent at once,
are evaluated asynchronously, and each one may be responded to zero or
more times.

The point to take home is that whatever caused `++poke-urbit` to be
called is also the root cause for the network message we're trying to
send. Thus, we say to send the network message along the given bone
`ost`.

##### Wire ('tack on new layer to duct')

Of course, we have to push a new layer onto our duct before passing it
along (or responding to it directly) anywhere. This layer can have any
data we want in it, but we don't need anything specific here, so we just
use the wire `/sending` (`/elem1/elem2/elemN` is one syntax used to
create `++path`s and `++wire`s of N elements). If we were expecting a
response (which we're not), it would come back along the `/sending`
wire, meaning that the path `/sending` will be passed back to the
response handler as an argument. Although it's not required, it's
generally a good idea to make the wire human-readable for bug-handling
purposes.

##### Term (sys-call)

Each move also has a `term`, composed of lowercase ASCII and/or `-`.
This `term` has the sign `@tas`. In this case, out `term` is `%poke`,
which is the name of the particular kind of move we're sending. You can
always use `%poke` to message an app. Other common names include
`%warp`, to read from the filesystem; `%wait`, to set a timer; and
`%them`, to send an http request.

The move ends with `*` (that is, any noun) since each type of move takes
different data. In our case, a `%poke` move takes a target (urbit and
app) and marked data, then pokes the arm of the corresponding mark on
that app on that urbit with that data. `[to-urbit-address %pong]` is the
target urbit and app, `%atom` is the `mark`, and`'howdy'` is the data.

When Arvo receives a `%poke` move, it calls the appropriate `++poke`.
The same mechanism is used for sending messages between apps on the same
urbit as for sending messages between apps on different urbits.

> We said earlier that we're not expecting a response. This is not
> entirely true: the `++coup` is called when we receive acknowledgment
> that the `++poke` was called. We don't do anything with this
> information right now, but we could.

**Exercises**:

-   Extend either of the apps in the first two exercises to accept input
    over the network in the same way as `pong`.

-   Modify `examples-pong` to print out a message when it receives
    acknowledgement.

-   Write two apps, `even` and `odd`. When you pass an atom to `even`,
    check whether it's even. If so, divide it by two and recurse;
    otherwise, poke `odd` with it. When `odd` receives an atom, check
    whether it's equal to one. If so, terminate, printing "%success".
    Otherwise, check whether it's odd. If so, multiply it by three, add
    one, and recurse; otherwise, poke `even` with it. When either app
    receives a number, print it out along with the name of the app. In
    the end, you should be able to watch Collatz's conjecture play out
    between the two apps. Sample output:

```
~fintud-macrep:dojo> :even &atom 18
[%even 18]
[%odd 9]
[%even 28]
[%even 14]
[%odd 7]
[%even 22]
[%odd 11]
[%even 34]
[%odd 17]
[%even 52]
[%even 26]
[%odd 13]
[%even 40]
[%even 20]
[%even 10]
[%odd 5]
[%even 16]
[%even 8]
[%even 4]
[%even 2]
%success
```

-   Put `even` and `odd` on two separate urbits and pass the messages
    over the network. Post a link to a working solution in :talk to
    receive a cookie.
