---
navhome: /docs/
next: true
sort: 15
title: Subscriptions
---

# Subscriptions

We've dealt fairly extensively with "poke" messages to an app, but these
are somewhat limited. A poke is a one-way message, but more often we
want to subscribe to updates from another app. You could build a
subscription model out of one-way pokes, but it's such a common pattern
that it's built into arvo.

Let's take a look at two apps, `:examples-source` and `:examples-sink`.
First, `:examples-source`:

    /?    314
    !:
    |%
    ++  move  {bone $diff mark *}
    --
    |_  {hid/bowl state/$~}
    ++  poke-noun
      |=  arg/*
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      :_  +>.$
      %+  turn  (prey /example-path hid)
      |=({o/bone *} `move`[o %diff %noun arg])
    ++  peer-example-path
      |=  pax/path
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      ~&  [%subscribed-to pax=pax]
      [~ +>.$]
    --

And secondly, `:examples-sink`:

    /?    314
    |%
    ++  move  {bone card}
    ++  card
      $%  {$peer wire {@p term} path}
          {$pull wire {@p term} $~}
      ==
    --
    !:
    |_  {bowl available/?}
    ++  poke-noun
      |=  arg/*
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      ?:  &(=(%on arg) available)
        [[[ost %peer /subscribe [our %source] /example-path] ~] +>.$(available |)]
      ?:  &(=(%off arg) !available)
        [[[ost %pull /subscribe [our %source] ~] ~] +>.$(available &)]
      ~&  ?:(available %not-subscribed %subscribed)
      [~ +>.$]
    ++  diff-noun
      |=  {wir/wire arg/*}
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      ~&  [%received-data arg]
      [~ +>.$]
    ++  reap
      |=  {wir/wire error/(unit tang)}
      ^-  {(list move) _+>.$}
      ?~  error
        ~&  %successfully-subscribed
        [~ +>.$]
      ~&  [%subscription-failed error]
      [~ +>.$]
    --

Cheat sheet:

-   `&` (pam) can either be the boolean true (as can `%.y`, `0`), or
    the irregular wide form of the `?&`
    ([wutpam](../../hoon/twig/wut-test/pam-and)) rune, which computes
    logical `AND` on its two children.

-   Similar to `&`,`|` is either the boolean false (along with `%.n` and
    `1`), or the irregular short for of `?|`
    ([wutbar](../../hoon/twig/wut-test/bar-or)), which computes logical `OR`
    on its two children.

-   `!` is the irregular wide form of `?!`
    ([wutzap](../../hoon/twig/wut-test/zap-not/)), which computes logical
    `NOT` on its child.

-   `?~` ([wutsig](../../hoon/twig/wut-test/sig-ifno/)) is basically an
    if-then-else that checks whether condition `p` is `~` (null). `?~`
    is slightly different from `?:(~ %tru %fal)` in that `?~` reduces to
    `?:($=(%type value) %tru %false)`. `$=`
    ([buctis](../../hoon/twig/buc-mold/tis-coat/)) tests whether value `q` is
    of type `p`.
<!-- One thing to watch out for in hoon: if you do `?~`, it
      affects the type of the conditional value: XXexample -->

-   `:_` ([colcab](../../hoon/twig/col-cell/cab-scon/)) is inverted `:-`: it
    accepts `p` and `q`, and produces `[q p]`.

-   `++bowl` is the type of the system state within our app. For
    example, it includes things like `our`, the name of the host urbit,
    and `now`, the current time.

-   `$%` ([buccen](../../hoon/twig/buc-mold/cen-book/)) is a type
    constructor: it defines a new type, composed of `n` types that it is
    passed. For example `$%  @  *  ^  ==` is the type of either `@`,
    `*`, or a cell `^`.
<!-- XX this is a union, right? -->

-   You may have noticed the separate `|%`
    ([barcen](../../hoon/twig/bar-core/cen-core/)) above the application core
    `|_` ([barcab](../../hoon/twig/bar-core/cab-door/). We usually put our
    types in another core on top of the application core. We can access
    these type from our `|_` because in `hoon.hoon` files, all cores are
    called against each other. (The shorthand for 'called' is `=>`.)
    Thus, the `|%` with the types is in the context of the `|_`, as it
    lies above it: `hoon.hoon` `=> |% w types => |_`

Here's some sample output of the two working together:


    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> |start %examples-source
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> |start %examples-sink
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-sink %on
    [%subscribed-to pax=/example-path]
    %successfully-subscribed]
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-source 5
    [%received-data 5]
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-sink %off
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-source 6
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-sink %on
    [%subscribed-to pax=/example-path]
    %successfully-subscribed]
    >=
    ~fintud-macrep:dojo> :examples-source 7
    [%received-data 7]
    >=

### :examples-source

Hopefully you can get a sense for what's happening here. When we poke
`:examples-sink` with `%on`, `:examples-sink` subscribes to
`:examples-source`, and so whenever we poke `:examples-source`,
`:examples-sink` gets the update and prints it out. Then we unsubscribe
by poking `:examples-sink` with `%off`, and `:examples-sink` stops
getting updates. We then resubscribe.

There's a fair bit going on in this code. Let's look at
`:examples-source` first.

Our definition of `move` is fairly specific, since we're only going to
sending one kind of move. The `%diff` move is a subscription update, and
its content is marked data which gall routes to our subscribers.

This is a slightly different kind of move than [we've dealt with so
far](/arvo/network). It's producing a result rather than calling other
code (i.e. it's a return rather than a function call), so if you recall
the discussion of ducts, a layer gets popped off the duct rather than
added to it. This is why no wire is needed for the move -- we won't
receive anything in response to it.

Anyways, there're two functions inside the `|_`. We already know when
`++poke-noun` is called. `++peer` is called when someone tries to
subscribe to our app. Of course, you don't just subscribe to an app; you
subscribe to a path on that app. This path comes in as the argument to
`++peer`.

In our case, we don't care what path you subscribed on, and all we do is
print out that you subscribed. Arvo keeps track of your subscriptions,
so you don't have to. You can access your subscribers by looking at
`sup` in the bowl that's passed in. `sup` is of type
`(map bone {@p path})`, which associates bones with the urbit who
subscribed, and which path they subscribed on. If you want to
communicate with your subscribers, send them messages along their bone.

`++poke-noun` "spams" the given argument to all our subscribers.
There's a few things we haven't seen before. Firstly, `:_(a b)` is the
same as `[b a]`. It's just a convenient way of formatting things when
the first thing in a cell is much more complicated than the second.
Thus, we're producing our state unchanged.

Our list of moves is the result of a call to `++turn`. `++turn` is what
many languages call "map" -- it runs a function on every item in a list
and collects the results in a list. The list is `(prey /example-path hid)`
and the function is the `|=` line right after it.

`++prey` is a standard library function defined in `zuse`. It takes a
path and a bowl and gives you a list of the subscribers who are
subscribed on a path that begins with the given path. "Prey" is short
for "prefix".

Now we have the list of relevant subscribers. This a list of triples,
`{bone @p path}`, where the only thing we really need is the bone,
because we don't need to know their urbit or what exact path they
subscribed on. Thus, our transformer function takes `{o/bone *}` and
produces `[o %diff %noun arg]`, which is a move that provides bone `o`
with this subscription update: `[%noun arg]`". This is fairly dense
code, but what it's doing is straightforward.

### :examples-sink

`:examples-source` should now make sense. `:examples-sink` is a little
longer, but not much more complicated.

In `:examples-sink`, our definition of of `++move` is different. All
moves start with a `bone`, and we conventionally refer to the second
half as the "card", so that we can say a move is an action that sends a
card along a bone.

We have two kinds of cards here: we `%peer` to start a subscription, and
we `%pull` to stop it. Both of these are "forward" moves that may
receive a response, so they need a wire to tack onto the duct before
they pass it on. They also need a target, which is a pair of an urbit
and an app name. Additionally, `%peer` needs a path on that app to
subscribe too. `%pull` doesn't need this, because its semantics are to
cancel any subscriptions coming over this duct. If your bone and wire
are the same as when you subscribed, then the cancellation will happen
correctly.

The only state we need for `:examples-sink` is a boolean to indicate
whether we're already subscribed to `:examples-source`. We use
`available/?`, where `?` is the sign of type boolean (similar to `*`,
`@`), which defaults to true (that is, `0`).

In `++poke-noun` we check our input to see both if it's `%on` and we're
available. If so, we produce the move to subscribe to
`:examples-source`:

    [ost %peer /subscribe [our %source] /example-path]

Also, we set available to false (`|`) with `+>.$(available |)`.

Otherwise, if our input is `%off` and we're already subscribed (i.e.
`available` is false), then we unsubscribe from `:examples-source`:

    [ost %pull /subscribe [our %source] ~]

It's important to send over the same bone and wire (`/subscribe`) as the
one we originally subscribed on.

We also set `available` to true (`&`).

If neither of these cases are true, then we print our current
subscription state.

`++diff-noun` is called when we get a `%diff` update along a
subscription with a mark of `noun`. `++diff-noun` is given the wire that
we originally passed with the `%peer` subscription request along and the
data we got back. In our case we just print out the data.

`++reap` is called when we receive an acknowledgment as to whether the
subscription was handled successfully. You can remember that `++reap` is
the counterpart to `++peer` as it's pronounced like 'peer' backwards.
Similarly, `coup` is similar to 'poke' backwards.

Moving forward, `++reap` is given the wire we attempted to subscribe
over, possibly along with an error message in cases of failure.
`(unit type)` means "either `~` or `[~ type]`, which means it's used
like Haskell's "maybe" or C's nullability. If `error` is `~`, then the
subscription was successful and we tell that to the user. Otherwise, we
print out the error message.
